# v0.9.x

## New features
* Adds simple auto-completion to the CLI.
* Adds the IsListParenthesizedMeta meta to aid in differentiating between parenthesized and non*parenthesized lists
* Adds support for HAVING clause in planner
* Adds support for collection aggregation functions in the EvaluatingCompiler and experimental planner
* Adds support for the syntactic sugar of using aggregations functions in place of their collection aggregation function
  counterparts (in the experimental planner)
* Experimental implementation for window function `Lag` and `Lead`.
* Adds support for EXPLAIN
* Adds continuous performance benchmarking to the CI for existing JMH benchmarks
    * Benchmark results can be seen on the project's GitHub Pages site
* Adds the `pipeline` flag to the CLI to provide experimental usage of the PartiQLCompilerPipeline
* Added `ExprValue.toIonValue(ion: IonSystem)` in kotlin, and `ExprValueKt.toIonValue(value: ExprValue, ion: IonSystem)` in Java to transform one `ExprValue` to a corresponding `IonValue`.

## Deprecated items
* Marks the GroupKeyReferencesVisitorTransform as deprecated. There is no functionally equivalent class.
* Marks `ionValue` property in `ExprValue` interface as deprecated. The functional equivalent method is `ExprValue.toIonValue(ion: IonSystem)` in kotlin, and `ExprValueKt.toIonValue(value: ExprValue, ion: IonSystem)` in Java.
* Marks `Lexer`, `Token`, `TokenType`, `SourcePosition`, and `SourceSpan` as deprecated. These will be removed without
  any replacement.
* Marks approximately 60 `ErrorCode`'s as deprecated. These will be removed without any replacement.
* Marks `Property.TOKEN_TYPE` as deprecated. Please use `Property.TOKEN_DESCRIPTION`.

## Misc/bug fixes
* Fixes the ThreadInterruptedTests by modifying the time to interrupt parses. Also adds better exception exposure to
  facilitate debugging.

## Breaking changes

### Breaking behavioral changes

In version v.9.0, as a result of deprecating `ionValue` property in `ExprValue` and introduction of the substitute method `ExprValue.toIonValue(ion: IonSystem)` in Kotlin, and `ExprValueKt.toIonValue(value: ExprValue, ion: IonSystem)` in Java.
Ion annotation will get elided from the provided Ion values in identity evaluations:

#### Example
```Kotlin
val query = `annotation::1`

/* Prior to v0.9 

  ExprValue: IonExprValue
  ionValue: annotation::1

*/

/* After v0.9

  ExprValue: IntExprValue
  toIonValue: 1

*/
```

_**Note: Support for Ion annotations will get added back once the work related to finalizing the specification as an RFC is completed. See [partiql-spec/issues/63](
https://github.com/partiql/partiql-spec/issues/63) for more details.**_

### Breaking API changes
* Removes the deprecated V0 AST in the codebase.
* Removes the deprecated MetaContainer in the codebase, removed interfaces and classes include:
    * [MetaContainer] Interface
    * [MetaContainerImpl]
    * [MetaDeserialize]
    * [MemoizedMetaDeserializer]
* Removes the deprecated Rewriter/AstWalker/AstVisitor in the code base, removed interfaces and classes include:
    * [AstRewriter] Interface & [AstRewriterBase] class
    * [AstVisitor] Interface & [AstVisitorBase] class
    * [AstWalker] class
    * [MetaStrippingRewriter] class
* Removes the deprecated ExprNode and related files in the code base.
    * [Parser] API `parseExprNode(source: String): ExprNode` has been removed.
    * [CompilerPipeline] API `compile(query: ExprNode): Expression` has been removed.
    * [ExprNode] and [AstNode] have been removed.
    * Functions related to conversions between ExprNode and PartiqlAst have been removed.
* Removes the deprecated SqlParser and SqlLexer
* Removes the `CallAgg` node from the Logical, LogicalResolved, and Physical plans.
* Removes the experimental `PlannerPipeline` and replaces it with `PartiQLCompilerPipeline`.
* Removes the prior ability to convert an `IonDatagram` to an `ExprValue` using `of(value: IonValue): ExprValue`, which is called by `newFromIonValue(value: IonValue): ExprValue`
  * Workaround could be to use older version of `partiql-lang-kotlin` or convert the `IonDatagram`'s values into an `IonList`
  * This will capability will be added back in an upcoming release
